Hello everybody.
My name is Victor Gallitski, and
I gave the first eight lectures in
this course Exploring Quantum Physics.
Today, it is my pleasure to welcome
those of you, who survived this course
to the last, concluding lecture
of exploring quantum physics.
So this lecture is going to be on the very
interesting subject of time-dependent
quantum mechanics, and we're going to
talk about it a little later but, first I
would like to take a couple of minutes,
to talk about the final exam coming up.
So, the format for the final exam,
is going to be slightly different
than that of a regular homeworks.
So, there going to be 16 problems
roughly one problem for every lecture.
And these problems intend to
cover all the material sort of
cover that we have studied in this
course including this lecture, and
starting from the very first lecture.
So the final exam will be
due two weeks from now,
now being the time when we
posted these last lectures.
And the deadline for
the finals is going to be the same,
as the hard deadline for the last posted
homework, so we'll notice that there is no
homework for this last week, no regular
homework, but there is a final exam.
Also you will have just one attempt, to
take the final, and unlike the homeworks,
where we have multiple attempts.
And once you start,
there will be time limit of 6 hours for
you to complete the final.
But you shouldn't worry too much about it,
because the final exam should be a little
bit on the easier side, as compared to the
last homeworks you've seen in this course.
So if you've got this far,
you certainly should take the final, and
get your certificate, or
probably certificate with distinction,
I'm sure many of you will get those.
So in other words, if you have, so
far completed most homeworks, or
all the homeworks, you definitely should
take the final, don't think about it.
It's going to be pretty straightforward,
and you will do well.
Now, going to the scientific part, well to
the lecture, so I've been sort of thinking
a lot about a possible subject for the
last lecture, and of course there are many
possibilities because there is a lot of
material we haven't had the time to study.
Unfortunately due to the time constraints,
and some constraints on
the format of these lectures.
But I decided to talk about this subject,
time-dependent quantum mechanics for
two reasons.
So the first reason is that, this topic
of time-dependent quantum mechanics is
among the very few topics in theoretical
physics that is still being develop.
So still a very active subject research
topic in a theoretical physics.
So this is different, by the way, from
most other things we have seen in this
course, where pretty much everything
we want to know, we do know.
So, of course people are still arguing
about foundations of quantum physics,
some philosophical interpretations
of quantum theory, etc.
So these discussions will
probably continue forever.
But once you accept the axioms of
quantum mechanics, and look at it from
the practical point of view, so we can
pretty much explain, or predict the result
of any considerable experiment that
can be performed with quantum systems.
So the problem we'll see not with
the mysteries of quantum physics,
but with lack of mysteries at this stage,
we actually understand
pretty well what we see.
But, this subject of
time-dependent quantum mechanics
is a bit different in that there
are still some open questions.
I wouldn't call it necessarily,
these questions are very mysterious,
but they're definitely open problems, and
frontiers which where still explore,
so this is one reason.
The second reason,
I have chosen this subject is because I,
myself have been working on it,
quite extensively for the last few years,
and this is among my
chief research interest.
So of course, what I just told you
a sort of implies that, well I hardly
can tell you all this interesting
things about time-dependent
quantum mechanics in one lecture, so
it's a very active research topic.
It could be a subject of a separate
course, but at least I can sort of give
you a flavor, what time dependant
quantum mechanics is about, and
also maybe,
one message of this lecture will be for
you to understand why this
subject is difficult.
Why, unlike in most other sub
fields of quantum physics here,
we still sort of struggling to.
Understand at the technical
level what's going on,
so this would be another sort
of message of this lecture.
So what we're actually going to be
studying in today's lecture is truly,
Time-dependent Schrodinger equation.
So we actually derived, well in quotes,
this equation in the very
first lecture of the course.
But we never truly used
the time dependent part.
So in some sense we got rid of it the
first moment we got the opportunity to do
so, because in most cases we have
looked at sort of the potential,
or actually no cases, we have looked at
the potential was not time dependent,
the potential was a constant.
So what we're going to be studying today,
is this deviation where the Hamiltonian,
H is a function explicit of time.
So it's not a constant,
it's a function of time.
So of course even, if it were not
to be a function of time, even if,
the Hamiltonian were a constant.
So the wave function would still
have been time dependent, and
the wave function would be.
We have talked a little bit
about this when we were driving
the feynman path integral.
So the wave function, as a function
of time in this case would have been
the evolution operator,
either the power -i over h bar.
Ht acting on an initial condition,
the question is no.
Now if the Hamiltonian is
a function of time, so
this of course doesn't work,
this in this case doesn't work,
and basically we don't know,
what the wave function is now, but
this is exactly what we want to know.
So basically, to solve
the time-dependent Schrodinger equation,
means either to find the wave-function,
Psi of t, explicitly.
Or even better,
to find the evolution operation, U of t,
that will relate the initial condition
to the, to the final wave-function.
So again, in the case of time independent
Hamiltonian, this evolution operator is
written here, so this is this exponential
[INAUDIBLE] minus I over H bar, H T,
but if the Hamiltonian
implicitly a function of time,
well there is no simple
lowest equation for this.
One thing I should reiterate about this
evolution operator, which is true both in
the case of time independent Hamiltonian,
and the case of time dependence,
is that actually evolution operator is
independent of the initial conditions.
So, it essentially describes a rotation of
the wave function in the Hilbert space.
So let us recall that, well,
wave-function describes, well,
has probabilistic interpretation.
Okay, and so, if we take,
let's say if we just create spectrum.
If we have let's say one
particle in the system so,
the wave function must
be normalized to one.
So, and it's true both for
the initial condition, and
for the time dependent part.
And it should remain one, just because
if we have a single particle in our non
relativistic quantum mechanics, it's just
going to stay there, it's not going to be.
It's not going to disappear and
new particles are not going to
appear out of the blue.
Well actually in quantum electrodynamics,
it is possible, but
we are doing non-relativistic
single particle quantum mechanics.
So this normalization
condition should be preserved.
And so if you think about Hilbert space,
again, as a vector space,
let me just erase this arrow here.
So if you think about the Hilbert space
as a vector space in which our wave
functions leave, so
what this condition implies in some sense,
is that the wave function
exists on a hypersphere.
Well again I'll draw it and
highlight it in three dimensions, but
of course we should sort of take
this picture with a grain of salt.
So it's a multidimensional Hilbert space,
and
there is some sphere,
didn't work out very well.
Let me just redraw it a little better.
So if we have a sphere, well,
that's not much better.
But anyways,
you understand what I'm saying.
So this sphere is essentially
a manifestation of this condition.
It basically means that
my wave function exists,
the normalization condition is preserved.
So this essentially means
psi squared is equal to 1.
And if I start from some initial
condition on this sphere, so
let's say this is my psi 0, and
the only thing which can happen with this
psi 0 is that it can sort of rotate in
this Hilbert space to a new psi
of t somewhere else on this here.
And the operator u essentially enforces
this rotation from psi not to psi of t.
So we already discussed
this as a matter of fact,
during the derivation of the Pythagorean
integral, but it was a month,
it was in the middle of this
optional technical innovation.
I'm not sure if all of you have looked
at it but I think it's a very important
message that actually u of t retains
the initial condition essentially by some
in this multidimensional Hilbert space
to a new time dependent wave function
somewhere in this hyper sphere
which is due to this normalization.
And the important this is that if we were
to choose let's say a different initial
condition somewhere, well, let's say
here on the sphere and we were to
apply the same time dependent Hamiltonian
or time independent Hamiltonian.
So in both cases, so
the rotation would be sorted by the same.
It would be different,
let's say psi naught prime and
the side prime of t, okay?
But the evolution operator,
this guy would be exactly the same, okay?
And so that's why I say, even better.
So of course we want to find in
a particular case when we're dealing with
a wave function, so we want to find
the wave function is a function of time,
because it will essentially describe
everything we want to know about
the system, or the probabilities, or
the transitions between various states and
amplitudes.
But if we know the evolution operator,
we in some sense can solve all possible
initial conditions in one shot.
Just because the evolution operator is
going to enforce this quantum evolution
just by acting on an initial condition.
But well, the problem with it as I
mentioned is that it's very hard
to find the evolution operator.
Now, why is that?
Why is it so difficult?
So let me sort of give you a very
brief explanation why it's difficult.
So if you look at this expression,
this equation, and if for a second, so
let me just write it here in quotes,
in some sense this initial condition,
for a second we assume that the
Hamiltonian is not really an operation,
but just some function h of t,
without the hat.
So then I can simply divide this equation,
let me put it in quotes
because this is not true.
So if we divide by psi of t and
integrate both sides of this equation,
over time, we can write the solution
to this, sort of Schroedinger equation,
dumbed down version of the Schroedinger
equation as e to the power
minus I over h bar, and then go from
zero to t [INAUDIBLE] dt prime,
let's say these are prime, and here's
going to be the initial condition sign up.
So this would be solution to
an ordinary differential equation,
times the differential
equation of the first order.
So if you look at it, that's what it is,
it seems to be very simple, so
why don't we just write that and
put a hat here?
So it turns out that we cannot do that.
And well those of you who
are interested should take the time and
stare at this expression for
a little while and work with it
a little bit to see why it is the case.
Well why it is not the case actually.
Why this is not true that
in the case of a true operator Schrodinger
equation so this solution doesn't work.
And the chief reason for
that is because the Hamiltonian, h of t,
does not commute with itself necessarily
at different moments of times.
So if we take two different moments
of time, let's say h of t1 and
h of t2, so the Hamiltonian
is not going to be the nature
of itself a different
moments of time is not zero.
And this is a major,
major complication which makes all quantum
mechanical time extremely difficult and
this even involves even
the simplest versions of these problem,
let's say with two level systems.
Even there, there is no, generally,
no closed solution to
a time dependent problem.
So let me just leave it here.
So now let me provide
a couple of general examples
of time-dependent quantum problems.
So the first example
will be the following.
So let's imagine we have a particle
which is moving in a potential of.
So we just draw a for
the purpose of illustration let me
just assume it's one dimensional.
And let's imagine that this potential
itself is sort of breathing.
So it's moving as a function of time for
example or
it's changing as a function of time.
And as time goes by let's
say it may become different.
And so the question that one may ask
is what happens with the particle,
the quantum particle
moving in this potential?
How does this wave function
change as a function of time?
So even if the potential were constant,
so we know that strictly speaking, rather
non trivial problem to figure out the
energy levels in this quantum potential.
And at any moment of time,
we can define sort of an equivalent time,
a dependent problem and
find the corresponding energy levels, but
if the Hamiltonian is time dependent,
the energy itself is not construed,
so this would be a wrong
question to ask in some sense.
What are the energy levels in the problem?
So we know at any moment of time there
is formally a time independent sort
of eigen value problem, but unless the
potential is changing in time very slowly,
these energy levels do not have a meaning.
Because we're always sort of pumping
in energy in this system and
the energy is not construct, so this is
really one of the major complications.
But the probabilistic interpretation
of the wave function is still valid and
we can still ask the questions about.
Well, the probability of let's say finding
a particle in a certain region in space.
And it's still going to be given.
So this probability is
still going to be given.
So let me just write it here.
This is an example of probability,
let's say to find a particle between
points x1 and x2, is going to be given,
well it's a function of time,
so let me write it down here,
is going to be equal to the integral from
x1 to x2 sin(x,t) everything
squared integrated over dx, so
this is an example of a physical
observable property that we can calculate
using a solution to the Schroedinger
equation if this solution is null.
Now the second kind of problem, well,
essentially the same time-dependent
[INAUDIBLE] equation.
But for a different type of
a system is let's say spin in
a time-dependent magnetic field.
So this relates to the lectures of
Professor Epelbaum who introduced spin.
And in particular, he was talking
about nuclear magnetic resonance,
MRI imaging for example.
So where actually what's being done
is that the spin is being rotated by
time-dependent field.
So and in this case the Hamiltonian well,
the way function first of all
is a two component spinner.
And the Hamiltonian here,
so this is our H of t.
So in this case,
the Hamiltonian simply be that sigma,
sigma being the vector of polymatrices.
And this Hamiltonian two by two matrix
acts on these two components spin.
And essentially this is first
order differential equation and
the problem here would be let's
say to find this side of t again.
And in this case for example,
the absolute value squared of this
psi [INAUDIBLE] of t squared.
This would give us
the probability of finding
the spin in the state up at
the moment of time it's used.
So this would be another observable
characteristic we can talk about.
Now an amazing thing actually and
I have to admit,
I didn't know it until
just a few years ago.
Is that this equation is actually well,
it's two by two matrix time-dependent
differential equation for
two by two matrix.
So this equation appears not to be
solvable in elementary functions,
you cannot solve this equation in
general analytically at least.
And so when I first looked at the base
equation, I thought well, I was just,
saw it during my lunch break.
I didn't even want to
look into the textbooks,
I just thought it was
a toy model of some sort.
But it turns out that even this equation,
maybe the simplest quantum
mechanical problem we can think of.
Two by two matrix or
two dimensional complex Hilbert space,
even this problem is not exactly
solvable for a general H of t.
So this gives you something well,
some sort of insight into
the complexity of the subject.
But as usual in theoretical physics,
if we can't solve the problem exactly,
it doesn't stop us from solving
it by some approximation methods.
I should mention that one major omission
in this course was perturbation theory.
Which is a general theory of
solving approximately various
stationary quantum problems.
We didn't talk about it, but it's a very,
very important piece of quantum mechanics.
Those of you who are interested in
professionally pursuing physics,
you should definitely
look into this subject.
But in this context and
the context of non-equilibrium or
time-dependent quantum mechanics.
There exists similar methods and
various approximation schemes and
there are two clear situations.
Two clear sort of asymptotically
opposite cases of either very fast
perturbations or very slow perturbations,
or so-called adiabatic perturbations.
So let me just write it down.
And so we're going to study
actually in the next lecture,
we're going to study fast or
sudden Perturbations,
which means fast changes in the potential.
And in the third part
of this lecture we're
going to discuss slow or
adiabatic perturbations.
Which lead to very interesting
so-called topological quantum
phase that appears in this solution
to the Schrodinger equation.
So just sort of to wrap up
this first introductory part,
let me first define what we
actually mean by fast and slow.
So as we discussed throughout
the course actually, well,
if you are talking about physically
a quantity which has a non-trivial
physical dimension,
be it the length or time or whatever.
So you can't really say that it's small or
large unless you compare it with
a quantity which has
the same physical dimension.
So when we have a time scale,
let me call it for instance,
a tau of a certain
time-dependent perturbation.
Let's say this is a typical time
at which the potential changes.
In order for us to see, to define whether
it's short time scale or long time scale.
We have to get another
quantity to compare with,
which has the same physical dimension.
And it turns out that in the case of
quantum problems if you have a spectrum,
so lets say this is our energy.
Okay, so
let's say these are different energies.
And there are some level spacing between
the neighboring, let's see energy levels.
What's in the harmonic oscillator keys,
it would be H omega in the case of
potential wealth will be something else
and they will in general change with time.
So let's see if we have a system which
is quantum particle which is let's say
sitting on a certain quantum level and
neighboring levels.
So the appropriate energy scale associated
with it is this delta, this level spacing.
And h over delta is another time scale.
So this is a time scale to compare
with when we are talking about fast or
slow perturbations.
So if tau, so if tau is much smaller
than h over delta, we will say that
this is a fast or sudden perturbation.
If on the other hand, tau is much
longer than h over level spacing,
we're going to be talking about slow or
adiabatic perturbations.
And these are going to be, the fast and
slow perturbations again are going to be
subjects of the next two
parts of this lecture.
Now just the final thing I'm going to
say here is that those of you who
are interested in research on this
sort of quantum dynamical systems.
And in sort of exact non perturbative
methods of solving quantum problems.
So I gave a lecture, well,
it's a research level presentation but
I think it should be
understandable to most of you.
So I gave a lecture on this
subject at the Kavli Institute for
Theoretical Physics a couple of years ago.
And so if you are interested,
you may want to take a look at it.
Of course, there are a lot of
other people working on this and
they have a number of amazing results.
But I think there is an interesting
development in this field
which allows us to
construct exact solutions.
But unfortunately, it's well beyond
sort of the scope of this course and
the level of this course.
So I'll just put a link here, so
if you're interested, take a look.
Otherwise, we will talk now about the
sudden and slow perturbations and see how
quantum problems can be solved in these
cases and what new phenomena appear there.